Update Integrations documentation page with `ruff server` explanation and setup guides (#12056)
astral-sh/ruff: docs/integrations.md

# Editor Integrations

## Ruff Language Server (`ruff server`)

> The Ruff language server, also known as `ruff server`, is what powers the diagnostic and formatting capabilities of Ruff's VS Code extension and other editors. It is a single, common backend for editor integrations built directly into Ruff, and a direct replacement for `ruff-lsp`, our previous language server. You can read more about `ruff server` in the [`v0.4.5` blog post](https://astral.sh/blog/ruff-v0.4.5).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ruff language server, also known as `ruff server`, powers the diagnostic and formatting capabilities of Ruff's VS Code extension and other editor integrations. It is a single, common backend built directly into Ruff, and a direct replacement for `ruff-lsp`, our previous language server. You can read more about `ruff server` in the [`v0.4.5` blog post](https://astral.sh/blog/ruff-v0.4.5).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I would remove the mention of `ruff-lsp` from here. I worry that it is more confusing than helpful for users that just want to set up their IDE. 

We could even argue that for most users, the entire *Ruff Language Server* section isn't relevant if, all they want to do, is set up their VS code.

Author: I think the added context about the language server would be helpful for users using editors besides VS Code. I'm open to removing the mention of `ruff-lsp` here, but I think we should still document it in its deprecated state.

Reviewer 2: That makes sense. To me, the mentioning in

> Other editors may support the legacy `ruff-lsp` server; see the [`ruff-lsp` documentation](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff-lsp#setup) for more.

seems sufficient.

> `ruff server` uses the LSP (Language Server Protocol), and as such works with any editor that supports this protocol. VS Code, Neovim, Helix, and Kate all have official, documented support for `ruff server`. Other editors may support the older `ruff-lsp` server - see the [Setup](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff-lsp#setup) guide in `ruff-lsp` for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ruff server` uses the LSP (Language Server Protocol), and as such works with any editor that supports this protocol. VS Code, Neovim, Helix, and Kate all have official, documented support for `ruff server`. Other editors may support the legacy `ruff-lsp` server; see the [`ruff-lsp` documentation](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff-lsp#setup) for more.
```

## VS Code (Official)

> Download the [Ruff VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=charliermarsh.ruff), which supports fix actions, import sorting, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Download the [Ruff VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=charliermarsh.ruff), which supports code formatting, fix actions, import sorting, and more.
```

> By default, the extension will attempt to use the `ruff` executable installed on your local system, and will use a bundled executable if that's not available. If `ruff` is `v0.4.5` or later, the extension will automatically use `ruff server` - otherwise, it will use `ruff-lsp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the extension will attempt to use the `ruff` executable installed on your local system, and will use a bundled executable if that's not available. If `ruff` is `v0.4.5` or later, the extension will automatically use `ruff server`; otherwise, it will use fall back to `ruff-lsp`.
```

> To learn more about configuring the extension, and the settings available for the extension, refer to [Configuring Ruff](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff-vscode/?tab=readme-ov-file#configuring-ruff) in the `ruff-vscode` documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure Ruff to format, fix, and organize imports on-save, add the following to your `settings.json`:

```json
{
  "[python]": {
    "editor.formatOnSave": true,
    "editor.codeActionsOnSave": {
      "source.fixAll": "explicit",
      "source.organizeImports": "explicit"
    },
    "editor.defaultFormatter": "charliermarsh.ruff"
  }
}
```

For more on configuring the extension, refer to the [`ruff-vscode` documentation](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff-vscode/?tab=readme-ov-file#configuring-ruff).
```

on how to configure the server from there.

> \[!IMPORTANT\]
>
> If you have the older language server (`ruff-lsp`) configured in Neovim, make sure to disable it to prevent any conflicts.

#### Tips

If you're using Ruff alongside another LSP (like Pyright), you may want to defer to that LSP for certain capabilities,
like `textDocument/hover`:

```lua
local on_attach = function(client, bufnr)
  if client.name == 'ruff' then
    -- Disable hover in favor of Pyright
    client.server_capabilities.hoverProvider = false
  end
end

require('lspconfig').ruff.setup {
  on_attach = on_attach,
}
```

If you'd like to use Ruff exclusively for linting, formatting, and import organization, you can disable those
capabilities for Pyright:

```lua
require('lspconfig').pyright.setup {
  settings = {
    pyright = {
      -- Using Ruff's import organizer
      disableOrganizeImports = true,
    },
    python = {
      analysis = {
        -- Ignore all files for analysis to exclusively use Ruff for linting
        ignore = { '*' },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

> By default, Ruff will not show any logs. To enable logging in Neovim, you'll need to set the `RUFF_TRACE` environment variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable logging in Neovim, set the `RUFF_TRACE` environment variable
```

to either `messages` or `verbose`:

```lua
require('lspconfig').ruff.setup {
  cmd_env = { RUFF_TRACE = "messages" }
}
```

> You can set the log level in `settings`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can then set the desired log level (e.g., `debug` vs. `warning`) in the extension `settings`:
```

```lua
require('lspconfig').ruff.setup {
  cmd_env = { RUFF_TRACE = "messages" },
  init_options = {
    settings = {
      logLevel = "debug",
    }
  }
}
```

It's also possible to divert Ruff's logs to a separate file with the `logFile` setting:

```lua
require('lspconfig').ruff.setup {
  cmd_env = { RUFF_TRACE = "messages" },
  init_options = {
    settings = {
      logLevel = "debug",
      logFile = "~/.local/state/nvim/ruff.log"
    }
  }
}
```

The `logFile` path supports tildes and environment variables.

## Helix (Official)

First, open the language configuration file for Helix. On Linux and macOS, this will be at `~/.config/helix/languages.toml`,
and on Windows this will be at `%AppData%\helix\languages.toml`.

Add the language server by adding:

```toml
[language-server.ruff]
command = "ruff"
args = ["server", "--preview"]
```

> Then, you'll register the language server as the one to use with Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, register the language server for use in Python files.
```
